Global Adoption, but how?
Since the introduction of Bitcoin and its subsequent launch in 2009, the crypto space has faced the challenge of scaling and speeding up Bitcoin to make it accessible globally and be on par with centralized solutions.
However, as the years went by, and the conservative approach of Bitcoin to innovation became the norm, the idea of a scalable currency was abandoned for the so-called Digital Gold line of thought.

The enthusiasts and professionals who wanted to improve Bitcoin’s scalability and compete with existing centralized solutions were then incentivized to do so by conceiving new networks.
As those networks were built, the idea of a scalable Bitcoin drowned in a sea of vastly different ideas and ambitious goals, tackling whole new branches of financial cryptography.

Their work and dedication led to the space we know today, where there are more networks than one can count.
Although unique, arguably none of them is capable of a global scale, and to elaborate I’ll split them into two groups:

Proof-of-work networks built on the ethos of Bitcoin.
Proof-of-stake networks that take some inspiration from Bitcoin, but operate under quite polarized fundamentals.
In the following paragraphs, we’ll explore the scaling potential of both PoW and PoS, outline how scientific research significantly refined and improved the scalability of PoW, and why POS can’t tap into that academic progress due to its core structure.

Costliness — The Universal Achilles Heel
The idea of Proof of work, first implemented by Bitcoin, is the use of costly digital signatures to reach consensus in a fully decentralized manner with no central point of trust.
Before Bitcoin, protocols weren’t able to get away from internal points of trust and Bitcoin was the first to ‘delegate’ those internal points of trust to the process of costly digital signatures — mining.
The mining process utilizes a ‘chain’ link structure, where transactions are bunched into blocks, and a hash solution is produced that satisfies the network’s self-adjusting difficulty.

Soon after the introduction of Bitcoin, people argued that costly digital signatures aren’t necessary for decentralized consensus and are a mere side-effect and brought up Proof of Stake as an alternative.

Their argument is as follows “Instead of costly computation, coin holders can lock their currency for a set period of time in exchange for participation in consensus”
This simplified description of Proof of Stake would lead newcomers to see it as a viable alternative, but as we dig deeper we’ll see it couldn’t be farther from the truth.

Without the costliness of mining, any protocol would fall back to a lower threshold of security. While PoW enjoys 50% Byzantine fault tolerance[Byzantine Fault, Longest-chain rule]. PoS has to make do with 33% [The Honey Badger of BFT Protocols].

An attentive reader might raise the question “So What? Why does a higher BFT have any importance?”
The answer to this seemingly simple question has to touch on vast changes, new dynamics, and even attack vectors and vulnerabilities.

The distribution mechanism of PoW happens solely through mining (assuming it is fairly launched). In addition, because of the costliness of mining, it is entirely unforgeable, and there’s no alternative than to brute force. The distribution process through mining pays participants fairly according to their contribution — A miner with a mining facility gets paid the same ratio as a home miner with a few machines.

By taking the costliness of block production out, you also take out the fair distribution that comes with it. Now, without mining, alternative methods need to be brought up to distribute the supply as fairly as possible.
Unsurprisingly, the vast majority of PoS networks do not attempt a fair launch but rather abuse the absence of cost to implement distribution schemes that enrich the founders, insiders, and VCs.

One can draw similarities between PoS (and some PoW networks) to equity financing commonly used by all kinds of entities in the financial world.

Similarly to how companies raise capital through the sale of shares and equity, PoS networks can enjoy the same capital by selling a percentage of the coin supply. Additionally, they have the option of selling to anyone, from Venture Capitalists to individuals and even to form partnerships in exchange for coins with service providers, exchanges, marketing teams, legal expenses, and so on.

This approach is so lucrative it’s worth giving an example:
During the launch of Ethereum, the founders decided to allocate 12 million ETH to themselves (10% of the circulating supply at the time of writing).

Seeing this wasn’t enough, they also decided to sell 60 million coins fetching at the price of 1337–2000 coins per 1 BTC earning them 30–40 thousand Bitcoin in the process.

Evidently, the capital raised was used for a multitude of things, not just for the enrichment of the founders. Given that, it reflects the company-like structure of the Ethereum Foundation and highlights its centralized uprising.

Press enter or click to view image in full size
Slightly outdated pie charts of the initial allocations of various PoS coins (ETH was PoW at the time).
Slightly outdated pie charts of the supply distribution of various leading PoS coins (ETH was PoW at the time)
To further emphasize this point, the coin supply in PoW has direct connections to real-world expenditure of energy and resources, but that’s it; you don’t get to participate in consensus regardless of how many coins you hold.
That said, the unfair distribution that popular PoS networks adopted plays right into its underlying network dynamics, and in turn, could lead to early investors having an unfair say and even obtaining incredible levels of control with no way of reclaiming that control.
Even so, if less than 100% of the supply is staked, the holding share of validators will grow over time, giving them further growth at no cost.
(As a challenge, feel free to come up with a solution that doesn’t involve human intervention).


The supply fairness and manipulation problem is just one of many that the main cause of is the abandonment of costly block production.
Here it’s worth emphasizing that each PoS comes with its unique adaptations and tradeoffs, which in turn changes the network’s vulnerabilities of the network to an extent, but all of them still are vulnerable to critical attacks and exploits.

To start this heavy topic on a light note, here’s a slightly comedic attack vector called the “$5 Wrench Attack”


A person or a group employing this attack will earn the same monetary value regardless if the victim holds coins in a PoS network or a PoW network. But where things differ is the gravity of the attack.
Besides the monetary value, in PoS they can also go after the keys of validators that specifically play a big role in consensus (be it in the present or past), which can lead to catastrophes of various degrees (Nothing at Stake attack)

If the staked supply is relatively small, then there’s no real disturbance to consensus, besides the monetary loss.
When the staked supply is large enough the extracted keys can be used to halt finalization, preventing consensus from being reached.
If the assailants manage to take hold of 34% of the supply, they can permanently halt the network, unless some form of slashing/burn or intervention is done. And because no consensus can be reached, this will lead to a hard-fork that relies on human intervention.
One of the most substantial and agreed-upon vulnerabilities of PoS comes from the fact that the block creation process has no external cost and is a fully internal process.

The term given to this vulnerability is called ‘Weak Subjectivity’:
Newly syncing or out-of-sync validators rejoining the network can’t tell the difference between the real history of the ledger and a forged one without an additional source of trust (1, 2).

This vulnerability originates from the notion that from a scientific viewpoint, Proof-of-Stake cannot form a decentralized consensus. The characteristic of costless blocks of PoS means that history can be forged by participants (with old keys) at no cost whatsoever, forcing them to rely on an external source of trust.

This comes in contrast to Pow, where to forge a brand new history would require the entire PoW of the network since genesis, and in reality has an almost innumerable cost.
To reverse the entire Bitcoin ledger with a fake, one would need 100% of the hashrate for over 600 days.

Someone could come up and say that we can chuck these vulnerabilities away, ignore them, and scale much better, isn’t that so? So why should we care about them? the next section will outline some critical differences that make PoS unfeasible at a global scale (consistency-based protocols).

Externality — A Missing Piece Left Behind
The key feature discussed in this section will be the effects of internal vs external block creation at a global scale, go over the scientific work based on costly block production, and show in detail why the security for speed tradeoffs of PoS are also scalability for speed tradeoffs.

Get Liberated Potato’s stories in your inbox
Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.

Enter your email
Subscribe
As stated before, Proof of Stake participants, time lock their coins to take part in the block creation process, wherein the authority to create blocks is shuffled according to some pre-agreed-upon rules. Their block creation process is consistent, orderly, and with minimal disagreements.

On the contrary, the block creation under Proof of Work is everything but orderly. Miners are in a constant and chaotic brute-force race to find the next block solution in order to earn back their operational expenditures and hardware investments.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

The left side shows PoW ETH blocktimes and on the right PoS ETH blocktimes.
In the years after Bitcoin’s introduction researchers extended the utility of PoW by coming up with a proven secure way to prune consensus data into a fraction of its original size while keeping the same security (Mining in Logarithmic Space, NiPoPoW, NiPoPoW paper).

Under Proof of Work, Miners look for Block solutions that are essentially a hash with a sufficient number of leading zeroes according to the set difficulty at the time of mining.
Researchers observed that some block solutions have more leading zeroes than needed for a hash to be considered a block solution, so they termed them Superblocks.
They also observed that even though mining is chaotic for miners, by taking a step back, they noticed that the occurrences of superblocks follow simple probabilistic rules.

e.g:
A superblock with N more leading zeroes is likely to emerge every 2^N blocks.
Following this logic, a superblock with N additional leading zeroes is just as hard to forge as 2^N normal blocks.
In essence, this means we can chain together these superblocks in a specific hierarchy, according to their difficulty/number of leading zeroes, to form a record of Proof of Work exactly as secure but at a fraction of the size.

The pruning mechanism orchestrated for Kaspa means that nodes don’t incur linear storage growth, but rather enjoy near-constant size which grows logarithmically.

The internal and costless block creation process in PoS is prone to internal manipulation and isn’t a consistent source of randomness. Hence, it cannot be used as a pruning mechanism, and they’ll have to manage with linear growth in ledger size.
We here can figure that the security for speed tradeoffs inherent in PoS, also cap their level of scalability.

Global Scalability — A Technical Viewpoint
These days in the crypto space, people usually gravitate towards the path of least resistance and that’s why you see users using chains like BNB, XRP, and Solana because in general, the user experience is decent.

However, people using these networks are fairly aware of their drawbacks

BNB is fully centralized (It costs 200M USD to run a cabinet validator)
Solana has to deal with outages, they have no max supply, and there are claims that fees are subsidized with its inflation.
XRP has a fault tolerance of 20%, way below the 33% BFT possible by PoS, which has further implications on security, scalability, and reliability. (Whitepaper, Ripple doesn’t scale)
Taking their cumulative number of transactions and comparing it to their ledger size gives us some incredible inefficiencies:


As mentioned before, Kaspa enjoys different storage dynamics thanks to the ideas behind pruning. But Why is it so important?
Well if we take the number of transactions payment processors handle a day -roughly 2 billion a day, and assume no protocol limitations, then the storage cost alone will make PoS networks more than unsustainable and render them inoperable in a short period as the growing ledger size continuously becomes too large for nodes.

The best case scenario according to the chart would be BNB at only 6.7TB per 1 billion transactions, but to drive the point even better I’ll include Bitcoin’s numbers as well.


As you can probably guess, this is hypothetical, but thanks to Kaspa’s GhostDAG protocol there are no security-speed tradeoffs, and scaling is merely a hardware-related problem.

Following that we can speculate that 100 blocks per second can handle 2 billion transactions a day (250 transactions per block).
Or even an optimized configuration that balances block speed and block size:
- 25 blocks per second.
- 400KB blocksize (1000 transactions / 2M block mass).
- 95% non-duplicate transaction rate (Transactions collisions).

Assuming all blocks are full, each node will have to store roughly 2.6TB worth of recent block data (until it can be safely auto-pruned).
It’s worth emphasizing that rather than the storage requirement linearly growing, it will fluctuate according to usage and peak at 2.6TB worth of data (I’ve removed the UTXOset size from the equation as for the time being as even 1 billion UTXOs are about 70GB according to Rusty Kaspa numbers).

Even when we take an efficient blockchain like Bitcoin that doesn’t employ the idea of pruning, the yearly cost of storage at scale will be over $10,000 even when buying cheap SSDs at $30 per 1TB, and with no redundancy.
This is more than most enthusiasts can afford, and so the number of participants capable of running nodes will diminish as the storage linearly grows to unmanageable sizes, meaning the network would have to trust significantly fewer nodes than optimal. For PoS this is even more critical due to the Weak Subjectivity discussed.

Kaspa — Theory Put Into Reality
With how the crypto space has evolved over the last decade, it’s easy to assume that scientific progress is meaningless. However, when morals and ideals are put in the right place, and with a focus on maintaining the ethos of Bitcoin and improving on it, you get a project like Kaspa.

Some could say that the current implementation of Kaspa isn’t that impressive, and for the most part, they would be right. Alternative solutions can indeed run at 1 block per second, and facilitate roughly the same level of throughput, but Kaspa’s current Golang implementation is far from optimal for the robust scientific ideas behind Kaspa.

That being said, comparing PoS networks to Kaspa by looking at merely the network block rate would do it a disservice — Golang Kaspa, as inefficient as it is, is still magnitudes more efficient than any alternate networks with comparable speeds.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

The additional room for improvements gave the motivation to have Kaspa be rewritten in Rustlang — A performance and security-focused programming language, for a few reasons:

Significant code debt from years of research and development has made further development and integration a challenge for new and experienced developers.
Rust enables maximal efficiency and higher blockrates which are both crucial for global adoption.
Testnet 11- A network running at 10 blocks per second with participants all over the world, working under real-world conditions without shortcuts, has been launched for the second time, after extensive work on further improvements.

Testnet 11 gave us the following insights:

Any decent computer from the last decade can run a node running at 10 Blocks per second (100$ Testnet 11 node).
The storage ceiling of 10 blocks per second stands at a mere 260GB.
Testnet 11 bundled with the Rothchild script has handled 150–200 million transactions a day with 0 faults.
It’s been stated enough by others, but the future prospects that DAGKnight, Smart Contracts, and other ideas enabled thanks to Kaspa’s design are only now starting to emerge. It’d be a worthwhile wait to see newer fields of progress turn from speculation to a reality experienced by many.
Kaspa — Towards global adoption and new paradigms.

Written by Liberated Potato